# Python is great

March 11, 2013

I have fallen in love with several programming languages in the past, with
C++ being the most dominate of them.

During the last years though, I have become a Python fan boy, trying to use
it as much as I can, something that translates to use it almost everywhere
except the rare cases that I have to rely to C++ strictly for performance
reasons.

A programming language can be characterized by the following attributes:

– Expressibility

– Standard library

– Performance

– Metaprogramming

– Community base, maturity and future potential

The ability to express algorithms classifies a language as imperative or
declarative…  A good example of an imperative language is C while SQL in
the other hand is another good example of a declarative one.

Imperative languages tend to be verbose limiting their expessibility by
polluting the code with low level details while declarative ones are
allowing the programmer to be produce more compact code that is both easier
to understand and write.

Python expressibility is one of the best someone can imagine. It’s
collection classes (list, set, tuple and dictionary) that are part of the
language are very flexible and intuitive to use even for the beginner while
the dynamic nature of the language makes possible lots of programming
tricks that greatly simplify the way the code is written. For example the
return value of a function can be of any type; something than in C++ jargon
can be expressed as polymorphism by return type. This feature can greatly
simplify cases where we need to return objects of not know type to the
caller for example a type agnostic factory function or in combination of
the fact that we can actually return from a function any number of values
as opposed to only one in traditional statically linked languages we can
simplify cases where we need to pass some variables by reference with the
intention to actually change its value… Overall when it comes to
expressibility I am convinced that Python scores much higher than any other
language I have already used and this includes C, C++, C#, Java, Basic,
Pascal, JavaScript and SQL to name a few….

The Standard library of a language is another critical factor I am
considering when choosing a programming language. No matter how expressive
or fast a language is without a sufficiently extensive standard library
will have to rely to third party implementations for things like data base
access, XML parsing and network programming.  Although from a purely
theoretical perspective such an approach keeps the language lean
propagating responsibility to third parties, which can either be an
individual developer, a software development company or even the open
source community, it is proven that such an approach might lead to a non
standardized platform that suffers from multiple implementations resolving
the same concept following slightly different approaches.  This pluralism
can lead to purely written documented and supported interfaces that in many
cases can be accounted for the failure of a well designed language to gain
popularity as for example happened to LISP and SCHEME.

Python’s Standard Library is very comprehensive and it design fits
perfectly with its spirit while has almost the same feeling across the
board…  It covers data base, flat files, csv, xml, Unicode and almost
everything that can be considered a ‘standard’ need minimizing the need for
custom development.. The concept of a complete standard library is such a
fundamental ‘pythonic’ concept that was nicked named as ‘batteries
included’.
