# Web vs Desktop development
March 11, 2013

Over the last years of the twentieth century we witnessed the browser wars with
more important incitement the antitrust case of the United States vs. Microsoft
which was marked by the introduction of Internet Explorer 4.0.

Back then it was not clear to everyone except the more tech savvy why this case
was so important to attract the interest of the federal government. Few years
later though, the evolution of the computer industry completely justified the
concerns about the possibility of a browser monopoly as absolutely valid.

In a matter of a handful of years we experienced a complete change of
directions in the field of User Interface development, as the traditional
desktop applications were replaced by thinner browser based clients pushing
technologies like MFC, Powerbuilder, Visual Basic 6, ActiveX to the borders of
legacy applications while Web related ones rapidly became the standard.

Java script, which in the past had been seen as a simple scripting browser
based tool, eventually became one of the most popular programming languages and
definitely the one with the more users around the globe.

Server side scripting technologies such as ASP.NET, PHP, Ruby On Rails, JSP to
name a few, work complimentary to browser based java script code utilizing AJAX
and DHTML and creating rather sophisticated front ends that in most cases
resemble a full blown desktop application.

Besides this though, it is true that web based applications have not totally
replaced their desktop homologous competitors. Although google docs are widely
used, they are still far behind in functionality compared to Open or Microsoft
Office. There is no web based equivalent to an Integrated Development
Environment like Visual Studio or Eclipse and email clients like Outlook or
Thunderbird are still in wide use offering superior functionality to gmail or
any other web based similar application.

I believe that the developer needs to have exposure to both ends of the
development spectrum and feel equally comfortable with either one. Based on the
need of the application we can either develop a full blown desktop client
utilizing the .NET and click once frameworks or we can create an ASP.NET as we
are very early adapters of it and follow its evolution very closely.

